How prot-scriber arrives at a description
=========================================

prot-scriber gives each query -- or each family of queries -- one short human
readable description (HRD), made of the words its Blast or Diamond hits agree
on. It takes five steps:

  1. Read the tables      one row per hit: query, subject, title
  2. Clean the titles     blacklist, filter, capture-replace pairs
  3. Gather the hits      every table, until a query is complete
  4. Choose a phrase      score the words, keep the best phrase
  5. Polish it            tidy the chosen phrase

The rule lists, and what each one acts on:

  list                   acts on            step  option                scope
  blacklist              raw title          2     --db-blacklist        table
  filter                 title              2     --db-filter           table
  capture-replace pairs  lower-cased title  2     --db-capture-replace  table
  split expression       cleaned title      4     -r                    run
  non-informative words  one word           4     -w                    run
  polish pairs           chosen phrase      5     -d                    run

'prot-scriber defaults' lists every built-in list; 'prot-scriber defaults NAME'
prints one.

Step 1: read the tables
-----------------------

Each --db table is read on its own, several at a time. A row is split at the
table's separator (TAB unless --db-sep says otherwise) and must have exactly as
many columns as the table's header names: 'qacc sacc stitle' unless --db-header
says otherwise (Diamond's qseqid and sseqid are understood too). A row with a
different number of columns -- an extra column, a blank line -- stops the run
with an error naming the line.

Of a row only the query, the subject and the subject's title are kept. E-values
and bit scores play no part: every hit counts the same, however weak, so apply
any cutoff before prot-scriber. A query that appears in no table is not in the
output at all -- prot-scriber knows only the queries its tables name.

Step 2: clean the titles
------------------------

Each table has its own three lists, and every title goes through them in this
order:

  Blacklist. If any expression matches anywhere in the title, the hit is
  discarded and nothing of it is used. It is matched against the title exactly
  as it stands in the table -- original case, organism and gene fields
  (OS=..., GN=...) included.

  Filter. Each expression deletes what it matches, one after the other, each
  working on what the one before it left, so their order matters. A filter
  list is written for one database's title format, to delete what surrounds
  the description in it.

  The title is lower-cased. The two lists above meet the original case, so
  write an expression of your own with (?i) to match either case.

  Capture-replace pairs. A pair is two lines: an expression, and what to
  replace each match with -- which may use the expression's capture groups, and
  may be empty to delete the match. Each pair is applied one match at a time,
  until it no longer matches (at most {{max-iterations}} times); then the next pair runs.

A title that comes out empty is dropped like a blacklisted one.

Each database writes its titles differently, so each has its own built-in
filter list. A table given none gets UniProt's, whatever database it came from:
name the right one, e.g. --db-filter nr=@filter-regexs-ncbi-nr
('prot-scriber defaults' lists them).

What the built-in lists make of a few titles, and the words that are left:

  Probable receptor-like protein kinase  ->  (discarded by the blacklist)
  Receptor-like kinase OS=Arabidopsis thaliana GN=FER  ->  receptor kinase
  DUF1234 domain-containing protein  ->  duf~1234 domain containing protein
  Receptor-like protein kinase ANXUR1  ->  receptor protein kinase anxur

The '~' keeps an accession in one word through step 4; step 5 takes it out. To
watch any title go through the lists, with the lists of your choice:

  prot-scriber explain --stitle '<title>'

Step 3: gather the hits
-----------------------

A query is described from all the hits it has in all the tables, and only then.
This is how prot-scriber knows it has them all:

  - Within a table, a query is complete when a row for another query follows,
    or the table ends. So all rows of one query must stand together, which is
    how Blast and Diamond write them.
  - Across tables, a query is complete once it is complete in every table. The
    rows each table has for it are added to the hits it already holds from the
    others, and once it is complete it is described at once, and its hits are
    freed.
  - A query missing from some table is described at the end of the run, once
    every table has been read.

A row that names no query is refused, in every mode. So is a table in which a
query's rows come back after other queries' rows: prot-scriber stops at that
line, and the error gives the command that groups the table. Or give
--unsorted-input, which reads such a table by holding every query in memory
until all tables have been read.

Each subject counts once per query. Within one group of a query's rows, the
first row for a subject whose title survives step 2 is used. When two groups
hold a hit on the same subject -- two tables, or, with --unsorted-input, two
groups of rows in one table -- only one of the titles is used: the later
group's within a table, and between tables which one is not defined. So do not
give the same database twice.

Step 4: choose a phrase
-----------------------

Words. Each cleaned title is cut into words wherever the split expression (-r)
matches; 'prot-scriber defaults description-split-regex' prints it. What it
makes of three cleaned titles:

  protein kinase c-alpha  ->  protein kinase c alpha
  superoxide dismutase [cu-zn]  ->  superoxide dismutase cu zn
  duf~1234 ox=3702 gn#2  ->  duf~1234 ox=3702 gn#2

Word scores. prot-scriber scores a word by how many of the query's words it
accounts for. Every occurrence of every word in all the query's cleaned titles
is counted, except the non-informative ones below -- so a word repeated within
one title counts twice, unless a capture-replace pair has removed the repeat. A
word with the share p of those occurrences has the inverse information content
-ln(1 - p): the more often it occurs, the higher. Its score is that value minus
the centre: the mean of the values of the query's distinct words, each word
taken once however often it occurs. With -q a number between 0 and 1 takes that
quantile instead; -q {{center-at-mean}}, the default, means the mean -- not the median, which
is -q 0.5.

So a word the hits share more than is typical for this query scores above zero,
a rarer one below. When every word occurs equally often, the centre is zero and
every word keeps its full value -- so a query with a single hit, whose words
each occur once, is described by its whole cleaned title. A query whose counted
words are all the same word gives it the value 1.

Scores are relative to the query's own words. Taking one word away -- by a
filter, a blacklisted hit, or by declaring it non-informative -- changes every
other word's share and the centre, and so every other word's score.

Non-informative words (-w; 'prot-scriber defaults non-informative-words-regexs'
prints the built-in expressions) are not counted. They are not removed either:
a non-informative word stays in its title and is worth a fixed {{non-informative-score}} in a
phrase, so it is kept wherever it stands -- at the start, in the middle or at
the end. When two phrases would otherwise score exactly the same, the one that
holds more of them wins. An expression of -w is tried against each word on its
own, and may match part of it: 'kinase' would also match 'phosphokinase'.

Phrases. A hit proposes the words of its title, in their order, that together
score highest; a phrase need not be a contiguous part of the title. The first
word kept is the first that scores above zero or is non-informative -- a hit
without such a word proposes no phrase. From there on every such word is kept,
a word scoring below zero is skipped, and a word scoring exactly zero is kept
unless it would end the phrase. A phrase's score is the sum of the scores of
the words it counts.

One word more is taken along, without being counted: the word directly before
the first word kept, whatever it scores. This is how a rare, specific word at
the front of a title -- 'phytosulfokine' in 'phytosulfokine receptor kinase' --
can reach a description at all. Since its score is not counted, its phrase ties
with the same phrase without it, when another hit proposes that one, and the
tie is decided alphabetically, as below: 'phytosulfokine receptor kinase' wins
over 'receptor kinase', 'zeta receptor kinase' does not.

It is only ever the word before the FIRST word kept; every word before that one
is dropped, a word scoring exactly zero too. So a non-informative word earlier
in the title, being kept itself, leaves the rare word after it to be skipped
like any word below zero. Three queries, the phrase their first hit proposes,
and their description:

  hits: phytosulfokine receptor kinase / receptor kinase
  first proposes: phytosulfokine receptor kinase
  description: phytosulfokine receptor kinase

  hits: protein phytosulfokine receptor kinase / receptor kinase
  first proposes: protein receptor kinase
  description: protein receptor kinase

  hits, with -q 0.5: mid neg kin / kin mid / kin
  mid scores: 0.0000
  first proposes: neg kin
  description: kin

The phrase with the highest score is the description. How many hits propose a
phrase plays no part: agreement between hits enters only through the word
counts. Between phrases with exactly the same score, the one that sorts first
by character code wins (for plain lower-case words: alphabetically), so the
order of the hits never matters.

When no hit proposes a phrase -- every hit discarded, every word of every hit
non-informative, or no hit holding a word that scores above zero or is
non-informative -- the description is '{{unknown-protein}}'.
--exclude-not-annotated-queries (-x) leaves such queries out of the output.

Step 5: polish it
-----------------

The chosen phrase is rewritten by the polish pairs (-d), which work like the
capture-replace pairs of step 2;
'prot-scriber defaults polish-capture-replace-pairs' prints the built-in ones.
What they make of two phrases:

  duf~1234 domain containing protein  ->  duf1234 domain containing protein
  transcription factor and  ->  transcription factor

The description is lower-case, as step 2 left every title -- unless a polish
pair of your own writes capitals, polishing being the one step after the
lower-casing.

An example
----------

A query with these four hits in a UniProt table, run with the defaults:

  sp|P1|FER_ARATH Receptor-like protein kinase FERONIA OS=Arabidopsis thaliana
  sp|P2|HERK_ARATH Receptor-like kinase HERK 1 OS=Arabidopsis thaliana
  sp|P3|ANX1_ARATH Receptor-like protein kinase ANXUR1 OS=Arabidopsis thaliana
  sp|P4|Y5801_ARATH Probable receptor-like protein kinase At5g38990

The fourth is discarded by the blacklist ('probable'). The filter removes the
accessions, the organism fields and '-like'; the capture-replace pairs turn
ANXUR1 into anxur and remove the lone '1'. 'protein' is non-informative, so it
is not counted. That leaves 9 counted words: receptor and kinase 3 times each
(p = 3/9, value 0.4055), feronia, herk and anxur once each (p = 1/9, value
0.1178). The centre is the mean over the 5 distinct words, 0.2329. This is what
'prot-scriber annotate ... --explain Q1' reports:

phrases, best first
     0.3452  receptor protein kinase   <- chosen
     0.3452  receptor kinase

word scores, best first
     0.1726  kinase                    seen 3 times
     0.1726  receptor                  seen 3 times
    -0.1151  anxur                     seen 1 time
    -0.1151  feronia                   seen 1 time
    -0.1151  herk                      seen 1 time

Both phrases show 0.3452. The whole difference is 'protein': it adds {{non-informative-score}}
to the first.

Gene families
-------------

With --seq-families (-f) prot-scriber describes families instead of single
queries. Each line of the families file is a family name, a TAB (-i), and the
members' query identifiers, separated by commas or white space (-g).

A family is described from all its members' hits together, as if they were the
hits of one query; step 4 is the same. A subject hit by several members counts
once for each of them. A family is described once every member is complete
(step 3); a member missing from some table holds its family back until the end
of the run, and a member without hits contributes nothing. A family without any
word worth keeping is described as '{{unknown-family}}'.

Queries that belong to no family are left out of the output unless
--annotate-non-family-queries (-a) is given; then each is described on its own,
in the same table as the families.

Where to look
-------------

  prot-scriber explain --stitle '<title>'
      step 2 for one title, with the lists of your choice
  prot-scriber annotate ... -o out.tsv --explain <id>
      steps 3 to 5 for one query or family
  prot-scriber annotate ... -o out.tsv --format tsv-scored
      the score, hit and phrase counts beside every description
  prot-scriber annotate ... -o out.jsonl --format jsonl
      everything, with scores in full precision
